README.md, before:

# About

This repository contains treebanks for Latin from the [Ancient Latin Dependency Treebank, version 1.7](http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/). The file `latin_treebank_perseus/ldt-1.5.xml` contains all of the treebank data.


# Dependency grammar

## About training with MaltParser

This was the command used to train the model (`.mco`):

```
java -jar ~/Downloads/maltparser-1.8.1/maltparser-1.8.1.jar -c perseus_cltk -i dg_train.conll -m learn
```

whose output was:

```
Started: Wed Apr 15 23:38:44 EDT 2015
  Transition system    : Arc-Eager
  Parser configuration : Nivre with allow_root=true, allow_reduce=false and enforce_tree=false
  Oracle               : Arc-Eager
  Data Format          : file:////Users/kyle/latin_treebank_perseus/test/conllx.xml
.          	      1	      0s	      3MB
.          	     10	      0s	      4MB
.          	    100	      0s	     16MB
..........	   1000	      1s	     64MB
..........	   2000	      2s	     80MB
..........	   3000	      3s	     74MB
....       	   3472	      4s	     34MB
Creating Liblinear model odm0.liblinear.moo
- Read all training instances.
- Train a parser model using LibLinear.
- Optimize the memory usage
- Save the Liblinear model odm0.liblinear.moo
Learning time: 00:00:59 (59969 ms)
Finished: Wed Apr 15 23:39:44 EDT 2015
```




## About Perseus treebank

In their own words:

> The annotation style proposed here is predominantly informed by two sources: the dependency grammar used by the Prague Dependency Treebank (itself based on Sgall et al. [9]), and the Latin grammar of Pinkster.

The following are the dependency tags in use:

```
PRED predicate
SBJ subject
OBJ object
ATR attributive
ADV adverbial
ATV/AtvV complement
PNOM predicate nominal
OCOMP object complement
COORD coordinator
APOS apposing element
AuxP preposition
AuxC conjunction
AuxV auxiliary verb
AuxX commas
AuxG bracketing punctuation
AuxK terminal punctuation
AuxY sentence adverbials
AuxZ emphasizing particles
ExD ellipsis
```

See the Perseus's treebank project's [overview of their dependency grammar system](http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/agdt/1.7/docs/guidelines.pdf) for specifics on what is intended by each tag.


# Part of speech

The file `make_pos_training_set.py` generates the training set `pos_training_set.txt`, which encodes part of speech data like so:

``` python
Cum/c-------- esset/v3sisa--- Caesar/n-s---mn- in/r-------- citeriore/a-s---fbc Gallia/n-s---fb- in/r-------- hibernis/n-p---nb- 
```

`pos_training_set.txt` is made for the purpose of being used with NLTK's `TaggedCorpusReader`.

Example custom training:
``` python
In [1]: from nltk.corpus.reader import TaggedCorpusReader

In [2]: from nltk.tag import UnigramTagger

In [3]: from nltk.tokenize import wordpunct_tokenize

In [4]: reader = TaggedCorpusReader('.', r'.*\.pos')

In [5]: train_sents = reader.tagged_sents()

In [6]: tagger = UnigramTagger(train_sents)

In [7]: untagged_text = "Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur."

In [8]: untagged_tokens = wordpunct_tokenize(untagged_text)

In [9]: tagger.tag(untagged_tokens)
Out[9]: 
[('Gallia', 'N-S---FB-'),
 ('est', 'V3SPIA---'),
 ('omnis', 'A-P---MA-'),
 ('divisa', 'T-PRPPNN-'),
 ('in', 'R--------'),
 ('partes', 'N-P---FA-'),
 ('tres', 'M--------'),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('quarum', 'P-P---FG-'),
 ('unam', 'A-S---FA-'),
 ('incolunt', None),
 ('Belgae', 'N-P---MN-'),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('aliam', 'A-S---FA-'),
 ('Aquitani', None),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('tertiam', 'A-S---FA-'),
 ('qui', 'P-S---MN-'),
 ('ipsorum', 'P-P---MG-'),
 ('lingua', 'N-S---FB-'),
 ('Celtae', None),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('nostra', 'A-S---FB-'),
 ('Galli', 'N-P---MN-'),
 ('appellantur', None),
 ('.', 'U--------')]

In [10]: tagger.evaluate(train_sents)
Out[10]: 0.8873793350017877
```


The following commands were used to make `123grambackoff.pickle`.

``` python
from nltk.corpus.reader import TaggedCorpusReader
from nltk.tag import BigramTagger
from nltk.tag import TrigramTagger
from nltk.tag import UnigramTagger
from nltk.tokenize import wordpunct_tokenize
import pickle

reader = TaggedCorpusReader('.', 'latin_training_set.pos')
train_sents = reader.tagged_sents()
tagger1 = UnigramTagger(train_sents)
tagger2 = BigramTagger(train_sents, backoff=tagger1)
tagger3 = TrigramTagger(train_sents, backoff=tagger2)

with open('123grambackoff.pickle', 'wb') as f:
    pickle.dump(tagger3, f)

```


# README

This is a README file for the Latin Dependency Treebank, version 1.5.


1. Preamble

	1.1 Source
	
		The Latin Dependency Treebank is available at:
		
		http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/1.5
		
		
	1.2 License
	
		LDT 1.5 is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution- 
		NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.5 License:
		
		http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5
		
		
2. Documentation

	2.1 Data Format
	
		The data given in this treebank is provided as an XML document.  Each 
		word contains six required attributes:
		
		id: This is a unique identifier, and corresponds to the word's linear 
		position in the sentence.  The first word in a sentence is given 
		id 1.
		
		form: The token form of the word.
		
		lemma: The base lemma from which the word is derived.
		
		head: The id of the word's parent.  If a word depends on the sentence 
		root, its head is 0.
		
		relation: The syntactic relation between the word and its parent.  A 
		catalogue of syntactic tags can be found in the syntactic guidelines 
		described below.
		
		postag: The morphological analysis for the word.  This field is 9 
		characters long, and corresponds to the following morphological 
		features:
		
			1: 	part of speech
			
				n	noun
				v	verb
				t	participle
				a	adjective
				d	adverb
				c	conjunction
				r	preposition
				p	pronoun
				m	numeral
				i	interjection
				e	exclamation
				u	punctuation
			
			2: 	person
			
				1	first person
				2	second person
				3	third person
			
			3: 	number
			
				s	singular
				p	plural
			
			4: 	tense
			
				p	present
				i	imperfect
				r	perfect
				l	pluperfect
				t	future perfect
				f	future
			
			5: 	mood
			
				i	indicative
				s	subjunctive
				n	infinitive
				m	imperative
				p	participle
				d	gerund
				g	gerundive
				u	supine
			
			6: 	voice
			
				a	active
				p	passive
			
			7:	gender
			
				m	masculine
				f	feminine
				n	neuter
			
			8: 	case
			
				n	nominative
				g	genitive
				d	dative
				a	accusative
				b	ablative
				v	vocative
				l	locative
			
			9: 	degree
			
				c	comparative
				s	superlative
			
			---
			
			For example, the postag for the adjective "alium" is "a-s---ma-", 
			which corresponds to the following features:
			
			1: a	adjective
			2: -
			3: s	singular
			4: -
			5: -
			6: -
			7: m	masculine
			8: a	accusative
			9: -

		
	
	2.2 Text
	
		LDT 1.5 is comprised of excerpts from eight texts, in the following 
		distribution:
		
		Caesar:	1,488 words
		Cicero:	6,229 words
		Jerome:	8,382 words
		Ovid: 4,789 words
		Petronius: 12,474 words
		Propertius: 4,857 words
		Sallust: 12,311 words
		Vergil:	2,613 words
		
		The editions of these texts are as follows:
		
		Caesar, C. Julius, Commentarii Rerum in Gallia Gestarum VII: A Hirti 
		Commentarius VIII.  T. Rice Holmes (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1914).
		
		Cicero, M. Tullius, Orationes.  Recognovit brevique adnotatione critica 
		instruxit Albertus Curtis Clark (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908).
		
		Jerome, Vulgate Bible.  Bible Foundation and On-Line Book Initiative.  
		ftp.std.com/obi/Religion/Vulgate. 
		
		Ovid, Metamorphoses.  Hugo Magnus (ed.) (Gotha: Friedr. Andr. Perthes, 
		1892).
		
		Petronius, Satyricon.  W. H. D. Rouse (ed.) (London: William Heinemann, 
		1913).
		
		Propertius, Charm. Vincent Katz (trans.) (Los Angeles: Sun and Moon 
		Press, 1995).
		
		Vergil, Bucolica, Aeneis, Georgica. The Greater Poems of Virgil. J. B. 
		Greenough (Boston: Ginn & Co., 1882).
		
		C. Sallusti Crispi Catilina, Iugurtha, Orationes et epistulae excerptae
		de historiis. Axel W. Ahlberg (Leipzig: Teubner, 1919).
		
		The following document_ids in the treebank correspond to the following 
		works:
		
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0002	Caesar (Commentarii de Bello Gallico)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0010	Cicero (In Catilinam)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0060	Jerome (Vulgata)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0055	Vergil (Aeneid)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0029	Ovid (Metamorphoses)
		Perseus:text:2007.01.0001	Petronius (Satyricon)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0066	Propertius (Elegies)
		Perseus:text:2008.01.0002	Sallust (Bellum Catilinae)
		
	2.3 Annotation Standards

		This release of the treebank has been annotated according to the 
		guidelines specified in version 1.3 of the "Guidelines for the Syntactic 
		Annotation of Latin Treebanks," found in docs/guidelines.pdf
			  
		
	2.4 Authorship

		Each sentence in the Latin Dependency Treebank is built from the efforts
		of two independent annotators (marked "primary" in the data) reconciled
		by a third (marked "secondary").  We would like to recognize the 
		contribution of the following individuals toward its creation and thank
		them for their commitment to the advancement of Classical scholarship:
	
		James Artz, Calliopi Dourou, J. F. Gentile, Kenny Hickman, Alex Lessie, 
		Viet Luong, Meg Luthin, Molly Miller, Robin Ngo, Skylar Neil and the 
		Tufts University LAT-181 class (Spring 2008).

Commit message:

upload README with dependency parse info

README.md, after:

# About

This repository contains treebanks for Latin from the [Ancient Latin Dependency Treebank, version 1.7](http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/). The file `latin_treebank_perseus/ldt-1.5.xml` contains all of the treebank data.


# Dependency grammar

## About training with MaltParser

This was the command used to train the model (`.mco`):

```
java -jar ~/Downloads/maltparser-1.8.1/maltparser-1.8.1.jar -c perseus_cltk -i dg_train.conll -m learn
```

whose output was:

```
Started: Wed Apr 15 23:38:44 EDT 2015
  Transition system    : Arc-Eager
  Parser configuration : Nivre with allow_root=true, allow_reduce=false and enforce_tree=false
  Oracle               : Arc-Eager
  Data Format          : file:////Users/kyle/latin_treebank_perseus/test/conllx.xml
.          	      1	      0s	      3MB
.          	     10	      0s	      4MB
.          	    100	      0s	     16MB
..........	   1000	      1s	     64MB
..........	   2000	      2s	     80MB
..........	   3000	      3s	     74MB
....       	   3472	      4s	     34MB
Creating Liblinear model odm0.liblinear.moo
- Read all training instances.
- Train a parser model using LibLinear.
- Optimize the memory usage
- Save the Liblinear model odm0.liblinear.moo
Learning time: 00:00:59 (59969 ms)
Finished: Wed Apr 15 23:39:44 EDT 2015
```


To run the parser, after [basic setup](http://stackoverflow.com/a/14065146):

```
In [1]: from nltk.parse.malt import MaltParser

In [2]: parser = MaltParser(working_dir="/Users/kyle/latin_treebank_perseus/", mco="perseus_cltk")

In [3]: txt = 'Hi constanter omnes nuntiaverunt manus cogi, exercitum in unum locum conduci.'


```


## About Perseus treebank

..

In their own words:

> The annotation style proposed here is predominantly informed by two sources: the dependency grammar used by the Prague Dependency Treebank (itself based on Sgall et al. [9]), and the Latin grammar of Pinkster.

The following are the dependency tags in use:

```
PRED predicate
SBJ subject
OBJ object
ATR attributive
ADV adverbial
ATV/AtvV complement
PNOM predicate nominal
OCOMP object complement
COORD coordinator
APOS apposing element
AuxP preposition
AuxC conjunction
AuxV auxiliary verb
AuxX commas
AuxG bracketing punctuation
AuxK terminal punctuation
AuxY sentence adverbials
AuxZ emphasizing particles
ExD ellipsis
```

See the Perseus's treebank project's [overview of their dependency grammar system](http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/agdt/1.7/docs/guidelines.pdf) for specifics on what is intended by each tag.


# Part of speech

The file `make_pos_training_set.py` generates the training set `pos_training_set.txt`, which encodes part of speech data like so:

``` python
Cum/c-------- esset/v3sisa--- Caesar/n-s---mn- in/r-------- citeriore/a-s---fbc Gallia/n-s---fb- in/r-------- hibernis/n-p---nb- 
```

`pos_training_set.txt` is made for the purpose of being used with NLTK's `TaggedCorpusReader`.

Example custom training:
``` python
In [1]: from nltk.corpus.reader import TaggedCorpusReader

In [2]: from nltk.tag import UnigramTagger

In [3]: from nltk.tokenize import wordpunct_tokenize

In [4]: reader = TaggedCorpusReader('.', 'pos_training_set.pos')

In [5]: train_sents = reader.tagged_sents()

In [6]: tagger = UnigramTagger(train_sents)

In [7]: untagged_text = "Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur."

In [8]: untagged_tokens = wordpunct_tokenize(untagged_text)

In [9]: tagger.tag(untagged_tokens)
Out[9]: 
[('Gallia', 'N-S---FB-'),
 ('est', 'V3SPIA---'),
 ('omnis', 'A-P---MA-'),
 ('divisa', 'T-PRPPNN-'),
 ('in', 'R--------'),
 ('partes', 'N-P---FA-'),
 ('tres', 'M--------'),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('quarum', 'P-P---FG-'),
 ('unam', 'A-S---FA-'),
 ('incolunt', None),
 ('Belgae', 'N-P---MN-'),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('aliam', 'A-S---FA-'),
 ('Aquitani', None),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('tertiam', 'A-S---FA-'),
 ('qui', 'P-S---MN-'),
 ('ipsorum', 'P-P---MG-'),
 ('lingua', 'N-S---FB-'),
 ('Celtae', None),
 (',', 'U--------'),
 ('nostra', 'A-S---FB-'),
 ('Galli', 'N-P---MN-'),
 ('appellantur', None),
 ('.', 'U--------')]

In [10]: tagger.evaluate(train_sents)
Out[10]: 0.8873793350017877
```


The following commands were used to make `123grambackoff.pickle`.

``` python
from nltk.corpus.reader import TaggedCorpusReader
from nltk.tag import BigramTagger
from nltk.tag import TrigramTagger
from nltk.tag import UnigramTagger
from nltk.tokenize import wordpunct_tokenize
import pickle

reader = TaggedCorpusReader('.', 'latin_training_set.pos')
train_sents = reader.tagged_sents()
tagger1 = UnigramTagger(train_sents)
tagger2 = BigramTagger(train_sents, backoff=tagger1)
tagger3 = TrigramTagger(train_sents, backoff=tagger2)

with open('123grambackoff.pickle', 'wb') as f:
    pickle.dump(tagger3, f)

```


# README

This is a README file for the Latin Dependency Treebank, version 1.5.


1. Preamble

	1.1 Source
	
		The Latin Dependency Treebank is available at:
		
		http://nlp.perseus.tufts.edu/syntax/treebank/1.5
		
		
	1.2 License
	
		LDT 1.5 is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution- 
		NonCommercial-ShareAlike 2.5 License:
		
		http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5
		
		
2. Documentation

	2.1 Data Format
	
		The data given in this treebank is provided as an XML document.  Each 
		word contains six required attributes:
		
		id: This is a unique identifier, and corresponds to the word's linear 
		position in the sentence.  The first word in a sentence is given 
		id 1.
		
		form: The token form of the word.
		
		lemma: The base lemma from which the word is derived.
		
		head: The id of the word's parent.  If a word depends on the sentence 
		root, its head is 0.
		
		relation: The syntactic relation between the word and its parent.  A 
		catalogue of syntactic tags can be found in the syntactic guidelines 
		described below.
		
		postag: The morphological analysis for the word.  This field is 9 
		characters long, and corresponds to the following morphological 
		features:
		
			1: 	part of speech
			
				n	noun
				v	verb
				t	participle
				a	adjective
				d	adverb
				c	conjunction
				r	preposition
				p	pronoun
				m	numeral
				i	interjection
				e	exclamation
				u	punctuation
			
			2: 	person
			
				1	first person
				2	second person
				3	third person
			
			3: 	number
			
				s	singular
				p	plural
			
			4: 	tense
			
				p	present
				i	imperfect
				r	perfect
				l	pluperfect
				t	future perfect
				f	future
			
			5: 	mood
			
				i	indicative
				s	subjunctive
				n	infinitive
				m	imperative
				p	participle
				d	gerund
				g	gerundive
				u	supine
			
			6: 	voice
			
				a	active
				p	passive
			
			7:	gender
			
				m	masculine
				f	feminine
				n	neuter
			
			8: 	case
			
				n	nominative
				g	genitive
				d	dative
				a	accusative
				b	ablative
				v	vocative
				l	locative
			
			9: 	degree
			
				c	comparative
				s	superlative
			
			---
			
			For example, the postag for the adjective "alium" is "a-s---ma-", 
			which corresponds to the following features:
			
			1: a	adjective
			2: -
			3: s	singular
			4: -
			5: -
			6: -
			7: m	masculine
			8: a	accusative
			9: -

		
	
	2.2 Text
	
		LDT 1.5 is comprised of excerpts from eight texts, in the following 
		distribution:
		
		Caesar:	1,488 words
		Cicero:	6,229 words
		Jerome:	8,382 words
		Ovid: 4,789 words
		Petronius: 12,474 words
		Propertius: 4,857 words
		Sallust: 12,311 words
		Vergil:	2,613 words
		
		The editions of these texts are as follows:
		
		Caesar, C. Julius, Commentarii Rerum in Gallia Gestarum VII: A Hirti 
		Commentarius VIII.  T. Rice Holmes (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1914).
		
		Cicero, M. Tullius, Orationes.  Recognovit brevique adnotatione critica 
		instruxit Albertus Curtis Clark (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908).
		
		Jerome, Vulgate Bible.  Bible Foundation and On-Line Book Initiative.  
		ftp.std.com/obi/Religion/Vulgate. 
		
		Ovid, Metamorphoses.  Hugo Magnus (ed.) (Gotha: Friedr. Andr. Perthes, 
		1892).
		
		Petronius, Satyricon.  W. H. D. Rouse (ed.) (London: William Heinemann, 
		1913).
		
		Propertius, Charm. Vincent Katz (trans.) (Los Angeles: Sun and Moon 
		Press, 1995).
		
		Vergil, Bucolica, Aeneis, Georgica. The Greater Poems of Virgil. J. B. 
		Greenough (Boston: Ginn & Co., 1882).
		
		C. Sallusti Crispi Catilina, Iugurtha, Orationes et epistulae excerptae
		de historiis. Axel W. Ahlberg (Leipzig: Teubner, 1919).
		
		The following document_ids in the treebank correspond to the following 
		works:
		
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0002	Caesar (Commentarii de Bello Gallico)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0010	Cicero (In Catilinam)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0060	Jerome (Vulgata)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0055	Vergil (Aeneid)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0029	Ovid (Metamorphoses)
		Perseus:text:2007.01.0001	Petronius (Satyricon)
		Perseus:text:1999.02.0066	Propertius (Elegies)
		Perseus:text:2008.01.0002	Sallust (Bellum Catilinae)
		
	2.3 Annotation Standards

		This release of the treebank has been annotated according to the 
		guidelines specified in version 1.3 of the "Guidelines for the Syntactic 
		Annotation of Latin Treebanks," found in docs/guidelines.pdf
			  
		
	2.4 Authorship

		Each sentence in the Latin Dependency Treebank is built from the efforts
		of two independent annotators (marked "primary" in the data) reconciled
		by a third (marked "secondary").  We would like to recognize the 
		contribution of the following individuals toward its creation and thank
		them for their commitment to the advancement of Classical scholarship:
	
		James Artz, Calliopi Dourou, J. F. Gentile, Kenny Hickman, Alex Lessie, 
		Viet Luong, Meg Luthin, Molly Miller, Robin Ngo, Skylar Neil and the 
		Tufts University LAT-181 class (Spring 2008).
